---
layout: post
title: "Ruby on Rails Upgrade Guide"
date:  2015-05-12 23:02:21
categories: rails
---

If you're reading this,
you're probably contemplating a long painful
process of getting your Rails app to a newer version.
I recently updated a Rails app from 3.2 to 4.2,
and this guide contains the general guidelines to follow
for making the upgrade easier.

If your Rails app is on version 4.0.x or below 3.2,
it's very important that you upgrade immediately,
since they no longer receives security updates.

## Make sure your tests pass

Having a good test suite
makes Rails upgrades so much easier.
This will help you catch
many subtle bugs that
might appear as a result of the upgrade.
Make sure you have a decent suite of tests
and they are all passing
before you start with the upgrade.

## Make incremental upgrades

If you're on Rails 3.2,
it is tempting to upgrade directly to Rails 4.2.
Avoid this.
Instead, upgrade first to 4.0.x,
then 4.1.x, and finally 4.2.x.

Making incremental upgrades
allows you to focus on what has changed
in each of those versions.
If you run into problems,
it is easier to figure out what changed
between the minor versions rather than
looking at all the changes.

I followed this guideline in a project
where I was upgrading from 3.2 to 4.2,
and the final step from 4.1 to 4.2
was so easy that I was ready to deploy
in less than 15 minutes.

## Upgrade other dependencies first

Before upgrading rails,
it's a good idea to upgrade other dependencies
to make sure you have compatible versions of those gems.
To check for newer versions of gems in your bundle,
use the `bundle outdated` command.

This will list all the dependencies
that have a newer version
than the one in your Gemfile.lock.
Go through the list
and look for gems that might not be compatible
with the newer Rails.

## Check what has changed

The official
[Rails Upgrade Guide](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/upgrading_ruby_on_rails.html)
has details about the major changes
that might cause problems during the upgrade.
It's very important that you take
a close look at the relevant section
of this guide.

Apart from that,
[Railsdiff.org](http://railsdiff.org/)
lets you see the diffs between
the files generated by various versions of Rails.
That's another way to understand
what has changed between the versions.

## Upgrade the Rails gem

Update the Gemfile
with the newer version of Rails.

{% highlight diff %}
- gem 'rails', '4.0.13'
+ gem 'rails', '4.1.10'
{% endhighlight %}

Now, update the gem using bundler.

{% highlight bash %}
bundle update rails
{% endhighlight %}

## Run the rake task

Rails provides a very helpful rake task
to help with updating your config files.
Before doing this, remember that
this will replace many of the files
in your config directory.
Run the rake task:

{% highlight bash %}
rake rails:update
{% endhighlight %}

This will ask you for confirmation about
overwriting some of the files.
You might want to keep your existing
`config/routes.rb` file.

## Review the diffs

Before you commit the changes,
take a close look at the diffs
and find out what has changed.
You might have made changes to your config files
that might got overwritten by `rake rails:update`.
so you might need to compare the diffs
to make sure things like your mail configuration
for production hasn't been changed to the Rails defaults.

## Fix the tests

At this point,
you'll most probably run into a some failing tests.
Make sure you're back to green before continuing.
Also pay attention to the deprecation warnings
that you might come across when running the tests.
Your app might run fine despite these warnings,
but fixing them now would save you a lot of time
during the next upgrade.

# Finishing up

This guide covered the general guidelines
to be followed for an upgrade to any version of Rails.
If you're looking for guides that cover
upgrades to a specific version of Rails,
you might want to refer to some of the articles listed below.

- [Rails Guides: A Guide for Upgrading Ruby on Rails](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/upgrading_ruby_on_rails.html)
- [How to Upgrade to Rails 4.2 - Justin Weiss](http://www.justinweiss.com/blog/2015/01/27/how-to-upgrade-to-rails-4-dot-2/)
- [RailsApps: updating to Rails 4.2](http://railsapps.github.io/updating-rails.html)
- [Case Study: Upgrade to Rails 4.1](http://www.sitepoint.com/case-study-upgrade-rails-4-1/)
- [Migrating existing session cookies while upgrading to Rails 4.1 and above](http://blog.bigbinary.com/2014/12/23/migrating-existing-session-cookies-while-upgrading-to-rails-4-1-and-above.html)
