---
layout: post
title: "What's New in Ruby 3.0?"
date:  2020-12-27 14:00:00 -05:00
categories: ruby
---

Every year on Christmas day,
the Ruby core team release
a new version of Ruby.
And this year,
it's a big one -
Ruby 3.0 was just released!
The big new features this time are
support for static analysis
and the new concurrency features.
Here are some of the highlights
of this release.

### Ruby and types

**[RBS](https://github.com/ruby/rbs)**
is the new language
for describing types in Ruby programs.
Type checkers like
[Sorbet](https://sorbet.org/),
[Steep](https://github.com/soutaro/steep)
or the newly introduced
[TypeProf](https://github.com/ruby/typeprof)
can use these types
to statically analyze the program.
Here's a simple example taken from RBS docs:

```ruby
# Actual code
class User
  attr_reader :login, :email

  def initialize(login:, email:)
    @login, @email = login, email
  end
end

# RBS
class User
  attr_reader login: String
  attr_reader email: String

  def initialize: (login: String, email: String) -> void
end
```

A new static type analyzer called
**[TypeProf](https://github.com/ruby/typeprof)**
is now included with Ruby.
To illustrate a very simple example,
consider the following code:

```ruby
def foo
  'bar'
end

foo(12)
```
Running `typeprof -v foo.rb`
will generate the following output,
pointing out that
you're sending an argument
to a method that doesn't accept any.

```
# Errors
test.rb:5: [error] wrong number of arguments (given 1, expected 0)

# Classes
class Object
  private
  def foo: -> String
end
```

### Ractors

Ruby's global interpreter lock (GVL)
has stopped Ruby from
being able to use multiple cores in parallel.
To work around this,
a new actor-like concurrency primitive has been introduced,
called `Ractor`.

Here's a simple example from the docs,
showing how message passing works with ractors.
You can find more examples in the
[Ractor docs](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/master/doc/ractor.md).

```ruby
r1, r2 = *(1..2).map do
  Ractor.new do
    n = Ractor.recv
    n.prime?
  end
end

r1.send 2**61 - 1
r2.send 2**61 + 15

p r1.take #=> true
p r2.take #=> true
```

### Rightward assignment

Experimental support has been added
for rightward assignment.
You can use `=>` to assign
to a variable on the right,
but I can't think of a reason
to use this over simple assignment.
However, this can be useful
for pattern matching
values in of arrays and hashes.

```ruby
42 => x # same as x = 42

x = { a: 1, b: 2 }

x => { b: foo }
foo #=> 2
```

### Find pattern matching

Pattern matching syntax has been extended
to allow extracting elements from an array.
Here's a simple example:

```ruby
case ['a', 1, 'b', 'c', 2, 'd', 'e', 'f', 3]
in [*pre, String => x, String => y, *post]
  pre  #=> ["a", 1]
  x    #=> "b"
  y    #=> "c"
  post #=> [2, "d", "e", "f", 3]
end
```

### Endless method definition

New syntax has been added
that allows you to skip the `end`
when the method body
contains a single expression.
When you need to extract
a one-line method in your code,
this concise syntax will come in handy.

```ruby
def square(x) = x * x
```

### Leading args in argument forwarding

Ruby 2.7 introduced argument forwarding
with `...` syntax.
However, you might want to access the leading arguments
and forward the rest.
Now the syntax has been updated to allow this:

```ruby
def method_missing(method_name, ...)
  return nil unless method_name.in?(allowed_methods)

  object.send(method_name, ...)
end
```

### Hash

**`Hash#transform_keys`** has been updated
to accepts an argument
which lets you define which keys should be renamed.
You can also pass a block
which will be used to transform the remaining keys.

```ruby
note = { title: 'Ruby 3.0', created_at: '2020-12-25' }

# without block
note.transform_keys({ created_at: :created })
# => { title: 'Ruby 3.0', created: '2020-12-25' }

# with block
note.transform_keys({ created_at: 'created' }, &:to_s)
# => { 'title' => 'Ruby 3.0', 'created' => '2020-12-25' }
```

**`Hash#except`** which has been available
in Rails through ActiveSupport
is now included in the language itself.

```ruby
x = { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3 }
x.except(:c)
#=> { a: 1, b: 2 }
```

### Performance goals, aka Ruby 3x3

In 2015, Matz annnounce
that Ruby 3 will be 3 times as fast
compared to Ruby 2.0
(aka the 3x3 goal).
The [optcarrot benchmark](https://github.com/mame/optcarrot).
has long been used
for comparing different versions of Ruby,
and with JIT enabled,
3.0 did indeed reach the 3x goal.

MJIT is still not mature,
and not all programs
can take advantage of the speedup.
Rails apps, for instance,
actually perform worse
with JIT enabled.
However, this is still great news
for CPU bound programs.
With newly introduced concurrency features,
the biggest performance wins from this release
will be seen later on
as more libraries make use of these features.


### Further reading

This post only covers
some of the features
that I found the most interesting
in this release.
If you want to read further,
the [announcement](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/news/2020/12/25/ruby-3-0-0-released/)
and the [changelog](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/v3_0_0/NEWS.md)
have more details.

The [Ruby References](https://rubyreferences.github.io/rubychanges/3.0.html)
page for Ruby 3.0
is the most comprehensive
list of all the new features,
and contains more details
and code examples.

[Is Ruby 3 Actually Three Times Faster?](https://codefol.io/posts/is-ruby-3-actually-three-times-faster/)
digs deeper into
how much performance has improved
in this version.

For my posts about previous versions of Ruby, see here:
[2.7](/posts/ruby-2-7/),
[2.6](/posts/ruby-2-6/),
[2.5](/posts/ruby-2-5-features/),
[2.4](/posts/ruby-2-4-features/),
[2.3](/posts/ruby-2-3-features/).
