---
layout: post
title: "What's new in Ruby 2.7"
date: 2020-01-08 23:00:00
categories: ruby
---

Ever since Ruby 2.1.0,
the Ruby core team have released a new version of Ruby every Christmas,
and this time we got 2.7.0.
This will likely be the last 2.x release of Ruby,
because Ruby 3.0 is expected to ship next Christmas.

Here's a quick summary
of some of the most interesting features in this release.
(For previous versions, see:
[2.6](/posts/ruby-2-6/),
[2.5](/posts/ruby-2-5-features/),
[2.4](/posts/ruby-2-4-features/),
[2.3](/posts/ruby-2-3-features/)).

## Pattern matching

A new pattern matching syntax was introduced,
which allows you to write case statements like this:

```ruby
def test_pattern(value)
  case value
  in 0
    'Zero'
  in Integer if value < 0
    'Negative'
  in Integer => n
    "Number #{n}"
  in { value: x }
    "Hash value: #{x}"
  in _
    'Unknown'
  end
end

test_pattern(-1)            #=> 'Negative'
test_pattern(0)             #=> 'Zero'
test_pattern(2)             #=> 'Number: 2'
test_pattern({ value: 3 })  #=> 'Hash value: 3'
test_pattern('four')        #=> 'Unknown'
```

## Startless ranges

In 2.6, we got end-less ranges,
and this time we will have start-less ranges.
This will allow syntax like:

```ruby
case n
when ..0  then 'Negative'
when 1..9 then 'Single digit'
when 10.. then 'Two or more'
end
```

Another interesting use of this
will be the ability to use this in DSLs.
For instance,
we could do this in ActiveRecord:

```ruby
Task.where(due_on: ..Date.today)
```

## Numbered parametes

A new syntax was added
to add numbered parameters to blocks.

```ruby
(1..3).map { _1 * _1 } #=> [1, 4, 9]

hash = { a: 2, b: 3 }
hash.map { "#{_1} = #{_2}" } #=> ["a = 1", "b = 2"]

add_3 = -> { _1 + _2 + _3 }
add_3.call(3, 5, 7) #=> 15
```

These are contrived examples,
but so far I'm not convinced it was worth adding this new syntax,
and I don't see myself using this over explicit arguments.

## New `Enumerable` and `Array` methods

**`Enumerable#tally`**
counts the occurences of each item in an enumerable,
and returns it as a hash.

```ruby
strings = ['a', 'a', 'a', 'b', 'c']
strings.tally
#=> { 'a' => 3, 'b' => 1, 'c' => 1 }

# in 2.6, we'd do it like this:
strings.each_with_object({}) do |value, result|
  result[value] ||= 0
  result[value] += 1
end
```

**`Enumerable#filter_map`** combines `select` and `map` into a single block,
avoiding the need for an intermediate array allocation.

```ruby
# squares of odd numbers in 1..10
(1..10).filter_map { |x| x*x if x.odd? } #=> [1, 9, 25, 49, 81]

# ruby 2.6
(1..10).select(&:odd?).map { |x| x*x }
```

**`Array#intersection`** is the equivalent of calling `&` on arrays,
but allows multiple arguments.

```ruby
[1,2,3,4,5].intersection([2,3,4], [2,4,5]) #=> [2, 4]
```

**`Enumerator::Lazy#eager`** converts a lazy enumerator into a non-lazy one.

```ruby
(1..).lazy
  .select(&:odd?)    # lazy
  .take(3)           # lazy
  .eager             # next operation will be non-lazy
  .map { |x| x * x } #=> [1, 9, 25]
```

## Argument forwarding syntax

New syntax (`...`) has been added to allow
forwarding all the arguments of a method.

```ruby
def add(a, b)
  a + b
end

def add_and_double(...)
  add(...) * 2
end

add_and_double(2, 3) #=> 10
```

## Deprecation behavior in keyword arguments

In previous versions of Ruby,
if you had a method with keyword arguments,
and it was called with a Hash as the last argument,
the hash would have been converted to keyword args.
However, this has been deprecated
with a view to remove this behavior in 3.0.
This will now cause a warning.

```ruby
def foo(key: 1)
  key
end

foo({ key: 2 })
#=> 43
# warning: The last argument is used as the keyword parameter
# warning: for `foo' defined here
```

The splat operator can be used to convert a hash to keyword args.

```ruby
foo(**{ key: 2 })
```

## Compaction GC

The Ruby garbage collector
has seen continual improvements with every release,
and this time a compactor has been introduced
which defragments the heap
and helps reduce memory usage.
A `GC.compact` method was also introduced,
to allow manually triggering compaction.

## IRB improvements

There are a lot of improvements to IRB,
with features such as
multiline editing,
rdoc integration to show documentation in IRB
and colorized output.

Although I'm happy to see improvements here,
IRB still lags far behind [pry](https://pryrepl.org/),
and I don't see myself using it much
until it catches up.

## Calling a private method on `self`

The behavior of `private` has changed slightly.
Previously, if you called a private method on `self`,
(eg. `self.foo`),
it would have been a `NoMethodError`
because private methods can only be called
on the implicit receiver.
This has changed so that
calling a private method on `self` no longer raises

This was previously only possible
for private `attr_accessor`s,
but now has been extended to all private methods.

## What features are we not getting yet?

Aside from all the new features that were added,
this version is also interesting
for some features that didn't make the cut.
Here's a few that were introduced as experimental features
but reverted before the final release.

The **pipeline operator** was introduced,
but reverted based on the community's feedback.

```ruby
# with pipeline
foo
  |> bar 1, 2
  |> display

# normal method chaining
foo
  .bar(1, 2)
  .display
```

I felt that it was an unnecessary addition
because it looks like Elixir's pipeline operator,
but effectively works like a method call.
In the above example,
the only difference is that
the pipeline (`|>`) version
doesn't require parentheses around `bar`'s arguments,
whereas it is required for the normal method call.

A **method reference operator** was introduced
and subsequently removed.
This would have allowed writing
`File.method(:read)` as `File.:read`.
An example that shows
how this would have
provided another way to chain operations:

```ruby
some_uri
  .then(&Net::HTTP.:get)
  .then(&JSON.:parse)
```

This was reverted because
Matz and the core team
wanted to rethink the broader design
around how functional programming features
would work in Ruby.

**Immutable strings** are not going to be the default yet.
When the `frozen_string_literal: true` magic comment
was introduced in Ruby 2.3,
the plan was to make string literals
immutable by default in Ruby 3.0.
However, Matz has reluctantly abandoned the idea
in order to avoid compatibility issues with gems,
and to make the transition to Ruby 3.0 easier.

And finally, a not about
the notorious **[flip flop operator](/posts/ruby-flip-flop/)**.
This confusing feature was deprecated in 2.6,
with hopes that it would be removed in 3.0.
However, after a few requests from the community,
Matz has decided to revert the deprecation,
so it's not going away in the foreseeable future.

## Links

- [Ruby 2.7.0 announcement](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/news/2019/12/25/ruby-2-7-0-released/)
- [Ruby 2.7 changelog](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/ruby_2_7/NEWS)

{% include rubynew.html %}
