---
layout: post
title: Adding Sorbet to a Rails project
date:  2023-02-14 12:00:00 -05:00
categories: ruby
---

Sorbet is a static type checker for Ruby.
In this post,
we will walk though
how we can add sorbet to a new Rails app.
Along the way,
we will also see a few examples of
how sorbet can help you
identify and fix bugs in your code.

## Setting up

Let's start off
by creating a simple Rails project
and setting up the database.

```bash
rails new blog
cd blog
rails db:setup
```

The sorbet team recommends
[tapioca](https://github.com/Shopify/tapioca)
for setting up sorbet in your projects.
Let's add tapioca to the gemfile.
This will also install sorbet as a dependency.

```ruby
group :development do
  gem 'tapioca', require: false
end
````

Now, let's run the tapioca init command
to set up our project for typecheking.
This will add the sorbet configuration
and fetch type annotations
for the gems in your application.

```ruby
tapioca init
```

Rails dynamically generates
a lot of methods and constants.
We can use the newly created `bin/tapioca` binstub
to generate type definitions for these methods.

```ruby
bin/tapioca dsl
```

This will add `.rbi` files
to `sorbet/rbi/dsl`.
Now, we're ready to run the typechecker:

```ruby
srb typecheck
```

As of this writing,
running the type checker
with a Rails 7 application causes type errors
related to `Turbo::Streams::ActionHelper`.
This is because of how Rails performs autoloading
([more details here](https://github.com/Shopify/tapioca/issues/671#issuecomment-1001048417))
and should hopefully be fixed in the next version.
For now, you can get around this
by creating `sorbet/rbi/shims/turbo-rails.rbi` with:

```ruby
# typed: true

module ::Turbo::Streams::ActionHelper
end
```

After this,
running `srb typecheck`
should show no errors.

## Adding a model

So far,
we've only type checked
an empty Rails application,
which isn't very exciting.
Let's start adding some code
so we can see how sorbet can help us.
First, let's generate a `Post` model:

```bash
rails generate model Post title body:text
rails db:migrate
```

Add `# typed: true` to the top of the `Post` model.
This will tell sorbet to statically type check this file.
Next, we will run the `tapioca dsl` command again
to generate a file with
type annotations for the `Post` model.

```bash
bin/tapioca dsl
```

This will create `sorbet/rbi/dsl/post.rbi`
and generate type signatures
for the methods generated by Rails,
such as `title` or `body`.
If you're unfamiliar with how to write sorbet type signatures,
this file will give you some examples.

Let's cause the typechecker to fail
by adding a method and deliberately making a typo.
Here I've mis-typed `title` and `titel`:

```ruby
class Post
  def id_and_title
    [id, titel].join(" ")
  end
end
```

Now running `srb typecheck` will show the following error:

```
app/models/post.rb:6: Method titel does not exist on Post https://srb.help/7003
     6 |    [id, titel]
                 ^^^^^
  Did you mean title? Use `-a` to autocorrect
    app/models/post.rb:6: Replace with title
     6 |    [id, titel]
                 ^^^^^
    sorbet/rbi/dsl/post.rbi:545: Defined here
     545 |    def title; end
              ^^^^^^^^^
Errors: 1
```

Not only does sorbet tell you
that the `titel` method doesn't exist,
it has figured out
that you probably meant to type `title`.
It also helpfully offers to automatically fix this
if you run the command again with the `-a` flag.

```bash
srb typecheck -a
```

And voila!
Sorbet has edited the file
and fixed the method name!

## Adding a type signature

Next, let's try adding a type signature to the method:

```ruby
  sig { returns(String) }
  def id_and_title
    [id, title].join(" ")
  end
```

This time,
sorbet tells us that `sig` and `returns` aren't defined.
This is because we need to add `extend T::Sig` to the model
to be able to define type signatures.
Once again, we can run `srb typecheck -a` to autocorrect this.

Now let's try breaking this signature
by removing the call to join,
so the method now returns an array:

```ruby
  def id_and_title
    [id, title]
  end
```

Now `srb typecheck` will show us:

```
app/models/post.rb:9: Expected String but found [T.nilable(Integer), T.nilable(String)] for method result type https://srb.help/7005
     9 |    [id, title]
            ^^^^^^^^^^^
  Expected String for result type of method id_and_title:
    app/models/post.rb:8:
     8 |  def id_and_title
          ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  Got [T.nilable(Integer), T.nilable(String)] (2-tuple) originating from:
    app/models/post.rb:9:
     9 |    [id, title]
            ^^^^^^^^^^^
Errors: 1
```

Unfortunately, this time
sorbet doesn't how to fix this,
but the error message shows us
that we expect a string,
but getting an array of two items,
and this should  help us
figure out how to fix it.

## Wrapping up

Now that you have sorbet set up on your app,
you can choose
how much you want to integrate it into your application.
Sorbet allows gradual typing,
which means you can enable typechecking
for some of your files,
while ignoring others.

Aside from typechecking,
sorbet also provides an LSP,
which allows editors and IDEs
to provide features like
code completion,
go-to-definition,
and showing errors right in the editor.

As we've seen above,
you can gain many the benefits of sorbet,
before writing even a single type signature.
I hope this article inspires you
to adopt sorbet in your projects! :)

Here are a few resources and articles about sorbet.

- [Getting started with Sorbet](https://sorbet.org/docs/overview) (official docs)
- [Sorbet: Stripe’s type checker for Ruby](https://stripe.com/blog/sorbet-stripes-type-checker-for-ruby)
- [Adopting Sorbet at Scale](https://shopify.engineering/adopting-sorbet)
