---
layout: post
title: "What's new in Ruby 3.3"
date:  2023-12-17
categories: ruby
---

Every year on Christmas day,
the Ruby core team releases
a new version of Ruby.
This year will likely be no different,
and we can expect Ruby 3.3 next week.

This year,
the primary focus of the release
is performance and developer experience.
There aren't as many
major changes to the language features
as in previous versions,
so this post is going to be shorter than usual.
Here are some of
the highlights of the release:

### YJIT

YJIT, Ruby's JIT compiler,
has seen some incredible advances
in the past couple of years.
Companies like
[Basecamp](https://dev.37signals.com/yjit-is-fast/)
and
[Shopify](https://railsatscale.com/2023-09-18-ruby-3-3-s-yjit-runs-shopify-s-production-code-15-faster/)
are already running
with preview releases of 3.3 in production
and have seen around 15% improvement
in average response times,
compared to 3.3.0 without YJIT.
In fact,
YJIT has been so effective
at speeding up Rails apps
that it will be
[enabled by default](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/49947)
on newly generated Rails apps
if you are on Ruby 3.3.

A new method,
`RubyVM::YJIT.enable`
has been introduced,
which allows you to enable YJIT at runtime.
This can be useful
if you want to load the app quickly
and then enable YJIT
after it has booted.
This is what Rails uses to enable JIT
in an initializer.

The YJIT team have written more about
YJIT's optimizations here:
[Ruby 3.3’s YJIT: Faster While Using Less Memory](https://railsatscale.com/2023-12-04-ruby-3-3-s-yjit-faster-while-using-less-memory/).

### RJIT

An experimental JIT compiler called RJIT
has been introduced.
This is written in pure Ruby,
and replaces MJIT,
which was an alternative JIT
that was available in Ruby 3.2.
RJIT uses a lot more memory than YJIT,
and exists only for experimentation.
In production,
you should always use YJIT.

### IRB

After using `pry` and `byebug`
as my preferred debugging tools for years,
I switched to using [IRB](https://github.com/ruby/irb#usage)
for all my debugging
in the past few months.
With this release,
IRB, and its integration
with the builtin [`debug` gem](https://github.com/ruby/debug#how-to-use)
has improved so much
that `pry` and `byebug`
are no longer necessary
for debugging your code.

### Range

There are a couple of changes to the `Range` class.
An `overlap?` method has been added:

```ruby
(1..3).overlap?(3..5) # true
(1..3).overlap?(4..6) # false
```

You can also call `reverse_each`
on begin-less ranges now:

```ruby
(..10).reverse_each.take(3) #=> [10, 9, 8]
```

### Prism parser

A new parser called [Prism](https://github.com/ruby/prism)
has been introduced as a default gem.
It is more error tolerant
and can be used as a replacement for ripper.
This is portable across Ruby implementations,
and is currently being integrated into
MRI, JRuby, TruffleRuby and Sorbet.

With prism,
you can parse code using
`Prism.parse`
and get a result that looks like this:

```
> Prism.parse("1 + 2")

#<Prism::ParseResult:0x000000010f5518c8
 @comments=[],
 @data_loc=nil,
 @errors=[],
 @magic_comments=[],
 @source=#<Prism::Source:0x000000012aa77530 @offsets=[0], @source="1 + 2", @start_line=1>,
 @value=
  @ ProgramNode (location: (1,0)-(1,5))
  ├── locals: []
  └── statements:
      @ StatementsNode (location: (1,0)-(1,5))
      └── body: (length: 1)
          └── @ CallNode (location: (1,0)-(1,5))
              ├── flags: ∅
              ├── receiver:
              │   @ IntegerNode (location: (1,0)-(1,1))
              │   └── flags: decimal
              ├── call_operator_loc: ∅
              ├── name: :+
              ├── message_loc: (1,2)-(1,3) = "+"
              ├── opening_loc: ∅
              ├── arguments:
              │   @ ArgumentsNode (location: (1,4)-(1,5))
              │   ├── flags: ∅
              │   └── arguments: (length: 1)
              │       └── @ IntegerNode (location: (1,4)-(1,5))
              │           └── flags: decimal
              ├── closing_loc: ∅
              └── block: ∅,
 @warnings=[]>
```

### M:N thread scheduler

A new M:N thread scheduler has been introduced
to improve thread and ractor performance.
Here, M is the number of ractors
and N is the number of native threads
(equal to number of CPU cores, for instance).
This allows us to create a large number of ractors
without having to pay the overhead
of creating a native thread for each one of them.

### Other changes

- In Ruby 3.4,
  there is a [proposal](https://bugs.ruby-lang.org/issues/18980)
  to use `it` as a reference
  to the first argument to a block.
  Calling a method called `it` without args
  has been deprecated
  and will show a warning.
- Bison has been replaced with
  [Lrama parser generator](https://github.com/yui-knk/lrama)
  to improve maintainability.
- There have been more optimizations
  to the garbage collector
  to further improve performance.

### More reading

With these posts,
I try to highlight some of the changes
that I found most interesting,
and often skip over features I might not use.
If you’re looking for a more comprehensive look at the release,
I highly recommend looking at the
[release announcement](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/news/2023/12/11/ruby-3-3-0-rc1-released/)
and the [changelog](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/v3_3_0_rc1/NEWS.md).

{% include rubynew.html %}
