---
layout: post
title: "Rails 8 authentication generator"
date: 2024-10-22
categories: rails
og_image: rails-8-auth.png
---

Rails 8 has introduced a generator
for adding basic authentication code to Rails apps.
This builds upon the authentication primitives
like `has_secure_password`
that were introduced in previous versions of Rails.
Last week, I decided to create a new Rails app
and try out this new generator.

## Running the generator

The first step to add authentication to your app
is to run the generator:

```bash
bin/rails generate authentication
```

If you're used to another Rails authentication generator,
like [authentication-zero](https://github.com/lazaronixon/authentication-zero),
you'll notice that there are no bells and whistles here.
Just a single generator command,
with no additional options.

## The generated code

If you want to understand this code,
the best place to start is
the `Authentication` module.
It handles tasks such as
writing the current session to a cookie,
looking up the current user from the session, etc.

Other than that,
I would recommend taking a look
at the generated migration
which shows the database schema
for the `User` and `Session` models,
and also the sessions and passwords controllers.

There's an excellent
[walkthrough of the code](https://www.bigbinary.com/blog/rails-8-introduces-a-basic-authentication-generator)
by BigBinary
that does a great job
showing each of these pieces in detail.

## Adding registrations to Rails 8

The first thing that stood out
at this point is that
there's no signup page!
The generator only adds
login and passwords controllers.
This seems like a rather strange choice,
considering most web apps will need
a way for users to sign up.

Anyway, adding a registrations controller is pretty straightforward:

```ruby
class RegistrationsController < ApplicationController
  allow_unauthenticated_access

  def new
    @user = User.new
  end

  def create
    @user = User.new(user_params)

    if @user.save!
      start_new_session_for(@user)
      redirect_to root_path, notice: "Signed up successfully"
    else
      render :new, status: :unprocessable_entity
    end
  end

  private

  def user_params
    params.expect(user: [:email_address, :password, :password_confirmation])
  end
end
```

_As an aside,
the `user_params` method is using the new `params.expect` API
introduced in Rails 8.
Previous versions of Rails
used the `params.require(...).permit(...)` syntax._

The `registrations/new` view looks like this:

```erb
<%= form_with(model: @user, url: signup_path) do |form| %>
  <div>
    <%= form.label :email_address %>
    <%= form.email_field :email_address, value: @user.email_address,
        required: true, autofocus: true, autocomplete: "email" %>
  </div>

  <div>
    <%= form.label :password %>
    <%= form.password_field :password,
        required: true, autocomplete: "new-password" %>
  </div>

  <div>
    <%= form.label :password_confirmation %>
    <%= form.password_field :password_confirmation,
        required: true, autocomplete: "new-password" %>
  </div>

  <div>
    <%= form.submit "Sign up" %>
  </div>
<% end %>
```

Don't forget to hook this up to `config/routes.rb`:

```ruby
  get "signup", to: "registrations#new"
  post "signup", to: "registrations#create"
```

## Final thoughts

For a while now,
Rails has had many of the building blocks
of an authentication system available by default
in the form of methods like `has_secure_password`.
It's easy to roll your own authentication with this,
it is nice to have a starting point generated for you.

I wish this generator were a bit more comprehensive than it is right now.
The lack of a registrations controller was surprising.
And adding a few tests,
much like the ones generated with controller scaffolds
would have helped people understand
how to write good tests for this.

That said,
this is a great starting point,
and it's nice to be able to remove
separate dependencies for authentication.
